304 Voices of Freedom

95. A Sharecropping Contract (1866)

Source: Records of the Assistant Commissioner for the State of Tennessee,
Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands, National Archives.

Despite the widespread desire for land, few former slaves were able to
acquire farms of their own in the post-Civil War South. Most ended up as
sharecroppers, working on white-owned land for a share of the crop at the
end of the growing season. Sharecropping was a kind of compromise
between blacks’ desire for independence from white control, and planters’
desire for a disciplined labor force. This contract, typical of thousands,
originated in Shelby County, Tennessee. The laborers signed with an X, as
they were illiterate. Typical of early postwar contracts, it gave the planter
the right to supervise the labor of his employees. Later sharecropping con-
tracts afforded former slaves greater autonomy. Families would rent par-
cels of land, work it under their own direction, and divide the crop with
the owner at the end of the year. But as the price of cotton fell continu-
ously after the Civil War, workers found it difficult to profit from the
sharecropping system.

Tuomas J. Ross agrees to employ the Freedmen to plant and raise
a crop on his Rosstown Plantation. ... On the following Rules, Regu-
lations and Remunerations.

The said Ross agrees to furnish the land to cultivate, and a suffi-
cient number of mules & horses and feed them to make and house
said crop and all necessary farming utensils to carry on the same
and to give unto said Freedmen whose names appear below one half
of all the cotton, corn and wheat that is raised on said place for the
year 1866 after all the necessary expenses are deducted out that
accrues on said crop. Outside of the Freedmen’s labor in harvesting,
carrying to market and selling the same and the said Freedmen
whose names appear below covenant and agrees to and with said
Thomas J. Ross that for and in consideration of one half of the crop
before mentioned that they will plant, cultivate, and raise under the

“What Is Freedom?” 305

management control and Superintendence of said Ross, in good
faith, a cotton, corn and oat crop under his management for the year
1866. And we the said Freedmen agrees to furnish ourselves & fami-
lies in provisions, clothing, medicine and medical bills and all, and
every kind of other expenses that we may incur on said plantation
for the year 1866 free of charge to said Ross. Should the said Ross fur-
nish us any of the above supplies or any other kind of expenses, dur-
ing said year, are to settle and pay him out of the net proceeds of our
part of the crop the retail price of the county at time of sale or any
price we may agree upon. The said Ross shall keep a regular book
account, against each and every one or the head of every family to be
adjusted and settled at the end of the year.

We furthermore bind ourselves to and with said Ross that we
wll do good work and labor ten hours a day on an average, winter
ard summer. The time to run from the time we commence to the
time we quit.... We further agree that we will lose all lost time, or
pay at the rate of one dollar per day, rainy days excepted. In sickness
ard women lying in childbed are to lose the time and account for it
tothe other hands out of his or her part of the crop at the same rates
that she or they may receive per annum.

We furthermore bind ourselves that we will obey the orders of
sald Ross in all things in carrying out and managing said crop for
sald year and be docked for disobedience. All is responsible for all
faming utensils that is on hand or may be placed in care of said
Frzedmen for the year 1866 to said Ross and are also responsible
tosaid Ross if we carelessly, maliciously maltreat any of his stock for
sad year to said Ross for damages to be assessed out of our wages for
sad year.

Samuel (X) Johnson, Thomas (X) Richard, Tinny (¥) Fitch, Jessie (X)
Simmons, Sophe (X) Pruden, Henry (X) Pruden, Frances (X) Pruden,
Eljah (X) Smith

