6 Voices of Freedom

“What Is Freedom?” 7

(and now being conquered) come (as they Seem) with penitent hearts
and beg forgiveness For past offences and also ask if their lands Cannot
be restored to them are these rebellious Spirits to be reinstated in their
possessionAnd we who have been abused and oppressed For many long
years not fo be allowed the Privilege of purchasing land But be sub-
ject To the will of these large Land owners? God forbid, Land monop-
oly is injurious to the advancement of the course of freedom, and if
Government Does not make some provision by which we as Freed-
men can obtain A Homestead, we have Not bettered owrconditio we
We Kave been encouraged by Government to take Up these'lands
in small tracts, receiving Certificates of the same—we have thus far
Taken Sixteen thousand (1 acres of Land here on This Island.
We are ready to pay for this land When Government calls for it. and
now after What has been done will the good and just government
take from us all this right and make us Subject to the will of those
who have cheated and Oppressed us for many years God Forbid!
We the freedmen of this Island and of the State of South Carolina—
Do therefore petition to you as the President of these United States,

that some provisions be made by which Every colored man can pur-

chase land. and Hold it as his own. We wish to have A home if It be
but A few acres. without some provision is Made our future is sad to
look upon. yess our Situation is dangerous. we therefore look to you
In this trying hour as A true friend of the poor and Neglected race. for
protection and Equal Rights. with the privilege of purchasing A
Homestead—A Homestead right here in the Heart of South Carolina.

We pray that God will direct your heart in Making such provision
for us as freedmen which Will tend to united these states together
stronger Than ever before—May God bless you in the Administra-
tion of your duties as the President Of these United States is the
humble prayer Of us all.—

In behalf of the Freedmen
Henry Bram
Committee Ishmael Moultrie.
yates. Sampson

Questions

1. How important is it for the petitioners to obtain land on Edisto Island,

as opposed to elsewhere in the country?

2. What do they think is the relationship between owning land and free-

dom?

97. The Mississippi Black Code (1865)

Source: Walter L. Fleming, ed., Documentary History of Reconstruction
(Cleveland, 1906-1907), Vol. 1, pp. 281-90.

During 1865, Andrew Johnson put into effect his own plan of Beonmstruc:
tion, establishing procedures whereby new governments, elected by white
voters only, would be created in the South. Among the first laws passed by
the new governments were the Black Codes, which attempted to regulate
the lives of the former slaves. These laws granted the freedpeople certain
rights, such as legalized marriage, ownership of property, and limited
access to the Courts. But they denied them the right to testify in court

in cases that only involved whites Serve on Juries or in state militias, or

to vote. ATEHTITES Pose 10 planters demands that The frecapeople be
required to work on the plantations, the Black Codes declared ia those
who failed to sign yearly labor contracts could be arrested and hired out to
white landowners. The Black Codes indicated how the white South would
regulate black freedom if given a free hand by the federal ghee, But
they so completely violated free labor principles that they discredited

Johnson's Reconstruction policy among northern Republicans.

VAGRANT Law

Sec. 2.... All freedmen, free negroes and mulattoes in this State, over
the age of eighteen years, found on the second Monday in January,

8 Voices of Freedom

1866, or thereafter, with no lawful employment or business, or found
unlawfully assembling themselves together, either in the day or night
time, and all white persons so assembling themselves with freedmen,
free negroes or mulattoes, or usually associating with freedmen, Tree
negroes or mulattoes, on terms of equality, or living in adultery or
fornication with a freed woman, Tree negro or mulatto, shall be
deemed vagrants, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum
not exceeding, in the case of a freedman, free negro, or mulatto, fifty
dollars, and a white man two hundred dollars, and imprisoned at the
discretion of the court, The Tree negro not exceeding ten days, and
the white man not exceeding six months...

Sec.7....Ifany freedman, free negro, or mulatto shall fail or refuse
to pay any tax levied according to the provisions of the sixth section

of this act, it shall be prima facie evidence of vagrancy, and it shall be

the duty of the sheriff to arrest such freedman, free negro, or mulatto
or such person refusing or neglecting to pay such tax, and proceed
at once to hire for the shortest time such delinquent tax-payer to any
one who will pay the said tax, with accruing costs, giving preference
to the employer, if there be one.

CrviL RIGHTS OF FREEDMEN

Sec. 1... Thatall freedmen, free negroes, and mulattoes may sue and
be sued, implead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity
of this State, and may acquire personal property, and choses in action,
by descent or purchase, and may dispose of the same in the same
manner and to the same extent that white persons may: Provided, That
the provisions of this section shall not be so construed as to allow any
freedman, free negro, or mulatto to rent or leasé'any lands or tene-
ments except in incorporated cities or towns....

Sec. 2... All freedmen, free negroes, and mulattoes may inter-
marry with each other, in the same manner and under the same regu-
lations that are provided by law for white persons: Provided, That the

clerk of probate shall keep separate records of the same.

“What Is Freedom?” 9

Sec. 3.... All freedmen, free negroes, or mulattoes who do now
and have herebefore lived and cohabited together as husband and
wife shall be taken and held in law as legally married, and the issue
shall be Taken and held as legitimate for all purposes; that it shall

not be lawful for any freedm. - i arry
with any white person; noses srywhitesperson to intermarry with
any free , free or mulatto; and any person who shall so

intermarry, shall on conviction
theféof shall be confined in+theState-pend d those
shall be deemed freedmen, free negroes, and mulattoes who are of
pure negro blood, and those descended from anegro to the third gen-
eration, inclusive, though one ancestor in each generation may have
been-a While person.

eC. 4....In addition to cases in which freedmen, free negroes,

and mulattoes are now by law competent witnesses, freedmen, free
negroes, or mulattoes shall be competent in civil cases, when a party
or parties to the suit, either plaintiff or plaintiffs, defendant or defen-
dants; also in cases where freedmen, free negroes, and mulattoes is
or are either plaintiff or plaintiffs, defendant or defendants, and a
white person or white persons, is or are the opposing party or par-
ties, plaintiff or plaintiffs, defendant or defendants. They shall also
be competent witnesses in all criminal prosecutions where the crime
charged is alleged to have been committed by a white person upon or
against the person or property of a freedman, free negro, or mulatto:
Provided, that in all cases said witnesses shall be examined in open
court, on the stand; except, however, they may be examined before
the grand jury, and shall in all cases be subject to the rules and tests
of the common law as to competency and credibility.

Sec. 5.... Every freedman, free negro, and mulatto shall, on the

second Monday of January, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-
six and annually thereafter, have a lawful home or employment,
and shall have written evidence thereof. .

Sec”... All contracts for labor made with freedmen, free negroes,
and mulattoes for a longer period than one month shall be in writing,

10 Voices of Freedom

ee —— =

and in duplicate, attested and read to said freedman, free negro, or
mulatto by a beat, city or county officer, or two disinterested white
persons of the county in which the labor is to be performed, of which
each party shall have one; and said contracts shall be taken and held
as entire contracts, and if the laborer shall quit the service of the
employer before the expiration of his term of service, without good
cause, he shall forfeit his wages for that year up to the time of quitting.
Sec. 7... Every civil officer shall, and every person may, arrest
and carry back to his or her legal employer an freedman, free negro,
r mulatto who shall'have quit the service of his or her employer
before the expiration of his or her term of service without good
cause... Provided, that sald arrested party, after being so returned,
may appeal to the justice of the peace or member of the board of
police of the county, who, on notice to the alleged employer, shall try
summarily whether said appellant is legally employed by the alleged
employer, and has good cause to quit said employer; either party
shall have the right of appeal to the county court, pending which the
alleged deserter shall be remanded to the alleged employer or other
wise disposed of, as shall be right and just; and the decision of the
county court shall be final.

CERTAIN OFFENSES OF FREEDMEN

Sec. 1.... That no freedman, free negro or mulatto, not in the mili-
tary service of the United States government, and not licensed so to
do by the board of police of his or her county, shall keep or carry

: i pe ——
firearms of any kind, or any ammunition, dirk of bowie

on conviction thereof TIT-tie-cotm ished by

Wi mms
rs sr A A Pat

ings, and all sucK arms or ammunition shail be forfeited to the
informer...

= —
rns Any freedman, free negro, or mulatto committing riots,

routs, affrays, trespasses, malicious mischief, cruel treatment to
; od : ) Filet laa

assaults on any person, disturbance of the peacesexercising the func-

aT —1

“What Is Freedom?” 11

tion of a minister of the Gospel without a license from some regu-
ing spirituous or intoxicating liquors,

larly organized church +
or committing any other misdemeanor, the punishment of which is
not specifically provided for by law, shall, upon conviction thereof
in the county court, be fined not less than ten dollars, and not more
than one hundred dollars, and may be imprisoned at the discretion

————————r— I a a
of the court, not exceeding thirty days.

Sec. 3....1f any white persomrshall sell, lend, or give to any freed-
man, free negro, or mulatto any fire-arms, dirk or bowie knife, or
ammunition, or any spirituous or intoxicating liquors, such person
or persons so offending, upon conviction thereof in the dounty court
of his or her county, shall be fined not exceeding fifty dollars, and
may be imprisoned, at the discretion of the court, not exceeding
thirty days....

Sec. s....Ifany freedman, free negro, or mulatto, convicted of any
of the misdemeanors provided against in this act, shall fail or refuse
for the space of five days, after conviction, to pay the fine and costs

imposed, such person shall be hired out by the sheriff or other offi-

apm

cer, at public outcry, to any white person who will pay said fine and
—— ep r: - ——

all costs, and take said convict for the shortest time.

Questions

1. Why do you think the state of Mississippi required all black persons to

sign yearly labor contracts but not white citizens?

2. What basic rights are granted to the former slaves and which are denied
to them by the Black Code?

98. A Sharecropping Contract (1866)

Source: Records of the Assistant Commissioner for the State of Tennessee,
Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands, National Archives.

