32 Voices of Freedom

103. Andrew Carnegie, The Gospel of Wealth
(1889)

Source: Andrew Carnegie, “Wealth,” North American Review (June 1889),
pp. 653-64.

One of the richest men in Gilded Age America, the industrialist Andrew
Carnegie promoted what he called the Gos i
pel of Wealth, the idea that
those who acc lated Jligati i »
umulated money had an obligation to use it to promote the

advancement of society. He explained his outlook in this article in the
North American Review, one of the era's most prominent magazines. Carne-

gie would become famous for practicing what he preached. He helped to
fund the creation of public libraries throughout the United States and
overseas, and gave money to philanthropies and charities ranging from
Carnegie Hall in New York City to the Carnegie Endowment for Interna-
tional Peace. But as an employer, he was tyrannical, strongly opposing
labor unions and ing th f violence against his o

i d approving the use of violence against his own workers,
including in the Homestead strike that took place three years after the

publication of this article. —
a ————

re

THE PROBLEM OF our age is the proper administration of wealth,
that the ties of brotherhood may still bind together the rich and
poor in harmonious relationship. The conditions of human life
have not only been changed, but revolutionized, within the past
few hundred years. In former days there was little difference between
the dwelling, dress, food, and environment of the chief and those of
his retainers. The Indians are to-day where civilized man then was.
When visiting the Sioux, I was led to the wigwam of the chief. It
was like the others in external appearance, and even within the dif-
ference was trifling between it and those of the poorest of his braves.
The contrast between the palace of the millionaire and the cottage
of the laborer with us to-day measures the change which has come

with civilization. This change, however, is nat 10 he deplored but

welcomed as highly beneficial. It is well, nay, essential, for the prog-

mm

America’s Gilded Age, 1870-1890 33

is highest and best in literature and the arts, and for all the refine-
ments of civilization, rather than that none should be so. Much
better this great irregularity than universal squalor. Without wealth
there can be no Macenas. The “good old times” were not good old
times. Neither master nor servant was as well situated then as to-day.
A relapse to old conditions would be disastrous to both—mot the
least so to him who serves—and would sweep away civilization with
it. But whether the change be for good orill, it is upon us, beyond our
power to alter, and, therefore, to be accepted and made the best of. It
is a waste of time to criticize the inevitable...

The growing disposition to tax more and more heavily large estates
left at death is a cheering indication of the growth of a salutary
change in public opinion. The State of Pennsylvania now takes—

subject to some exceptions—one tenth of the property left by its citi-
zens. The budget presented in the British Parliament the other day
proposes to increase the death duties; and, most significant of all, the
new tax is to be a graduated one. Of all forms of taxation this seems
the wisest. Men who continue hoarding great sums all their lives,
the proper use of which for public ends would work good to thecom-

munity from which it chiefly came, should be. made to feel that the

community, in the form of the State, cannot thus be deprived of its
proper share. By taxing estates heavily at death the State marks its

condemnation of the selfish millionaire’s unworthy life.

Tt is desirable that nations should go much further in this direc-
tion. Indeed, it is difficult to set bounds to the share of a rich man’s
estate which should go at his death to the public through the agency
of the State, and by all means such taxes should be graduated, begin-
ning at nothing upon moderate sums to dependants, and increasing
rapidly as the amounts swell... ..

In bestowing charity, the main consideration should be to help
those who will help themselves; to provide part of tie means by
which those who desire to improve may do so; to give those who
desire to rise the aids by which they may rise; to assist, but rarely or

x

34 Voices of Freedom

never to do all. Neither the individual nor the race is improved by
almsgiving. Those worthy of assistance, except in rare cases, seldom
Tequire “assistance. The really valuable men of the race never do,
except in case of accident or sudden change. Every one has, of course,
cases of individuals brought to his own knowledge where temporary
assistance can do genuine good, and these he will not overlook. But
the amount which can be. wisely given by the individual for indi-
viduals s is-necessarily | limited by his lack of knowledge of the circum-
stances connected with each. He is the only true reformer who is as

careful and as anxious not to 0 aid the unworthy as he is to aid the
worthy; and, perhaps, even more so, for in almsgiving more injury is
probably done by by rewarding vice than than by relieving: virtue..

The best m means of benefiting the ial is to ples within
its reach the ladders upon which the aspi ing can rise—{ree librar-

ies, parks, and Fh by rar men are helped i in
body and = mind; works of art, certain to give pleasure and improve
the public taste; and public institutions of various kinds, which will
improve the general condition of the people; in this manner return-
ing their surplus wealth to the mass of their fellows in the forms
best calculated Todo them lasting good.

Thus is the problem of rich and poor to be solved. The laws of
accumulation will be left free, the laws of distribution free. Indi-

vidualism will continue, but the millionaire will be but a trustee

far better than it could or would hares done for itself. . The best minds
will thus have reached a stage in the development of the race in
which it is clearly seen that there is no mode of disposing of surplus
wealth creditable to thoughtful and earnest men into whose hands
it flows, save by using it year by year for the general good. This day
already dawns. Men may die without i incurring the pity of their fel-

lows, still sharers in great business enterprises from which their capi-
tal cannot be or has not been withdrawn, and which is left chiefly at

death for public uses; yet the day is not far distant when the man

America’s Gilded Age, 1870-1890 35

who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth, which
was free for him to administer during life, will pass away “unwept,
unhonored, and unsung,” no matter to what uses he leaves the dross
which Tie cannot take with him. Of such as these the public verdict
will then be: “The man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.”

Such, in my opinion, is the true gospel concerning wealth, obe-
dience to which is destined some day to solve the problem of the
rich and the poor, and to bring “Peace on earth, among men good

will”

Questions

1. Why does Carnegie think it is better to build public institutions than to

give charity to the poor?

2. Why does Carnegie believe that “the man who dies thus rich dies dis-

graced”?

104. William Graham Sumner on Social
Darwinism (ca. 1880)

Source: Albert G. Keller, ed., The Challenge of Facts and Other Essays by

William Graham Sumner (New Haven, Conn., 1914), pp. 17-27. Keller {
concludes that the essay from which this excerpt is taken was written during

the 1880s.

During the Gilded Age, large numbers of businessmen and middle-class
Americans adopted the social outlook known as Social Darwinism. Adher-
ents of this viewpoint borrowed language from Charles Darwin’s great
work On the Origin of Species (1859), which expounded the theory of evolu-
tion among plant and animal species, to explain the success and failure of
individual human beings and entire social classes. According to Social
Darwinists, evolution was as natural a process in human society as in

