34 Voices of Freedom

never to do all. Neither the individual nor the race is improved by
almsgiving Those wortliy of assistance, except in rare cases, seldom
require assistance. The really valuable men of the race never do,
except in case of accident or sudden change. Every one has, of course,
cases of individuals brought to his own knowledge where temporary
assistance can do genuine good, and these he will not overlook. But
the amount which can be wisely given by the individual for indi-

viduals is necessarily | limited by fife lack of alleen cis of the circum-

worthy, and, p perhaps, even more so, So, fori in lve nig more injury is
probably done by by rewarding vice than by relieving: virtue. .

The best m means of benefiting the community is to las within
its reach the ladders upon which the aspiring can rise—free librar-
les, parks, and means cans of recreation, by which men are helped in
body and mind; ; works of art, certain to give pleasure and improve
the public taste; and public institutions of vz f various kinds, which will
improve ove the general condition of 1 of the peoples in this manner return-
ing their surplus wealth to the mass of their fellows in the forms
best calculated io do them lasting good.

Thus is the problem of rich and poor to be solved. The laws of
accumulation will be left free, the laws of distribution free. Indi-
vidualism will continue, but the millionaire will be but a trustee

forthe poor, intrusted for a season with a great part of the increased
wealth of the community, but administering it for the community
far better than it could or would have done for itself. The best minds
will thus have reached a stage in the development of the race in
which it is clearly seen that there is no mode of disposing of surplus
wealth creditable to thoughtful and earnest men into whose hands
it flows, save by using it year by year for the > general good. This day
already dawns. Men may die without i incurring ng the pity of their fel-
lows, still sharers in great business enterprises from which their capi-
tal cannot be or has not been withdrawn, and which is left chiefly at
death for public uses; yet the day is not far distant when the man

America’s Gilded Age, 1870-1890 35

who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth, which
was free for him to administer during life, will pass away “unwept,
unhonored, and unsung,” no matter to what uses he leaves the dross
which he cannot take with him. Of such as these the public verdict
will then be: “The man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.”

Such, in my opinion, is the true gospel concerning wealth, obe-
dience to which is destined some day to solve the problem of the
rich and the poor, and to bring “Peace on earth, among men good
will”

Questions

1. Why does Carnegie think it is better to build public institutions than to
give charity to the poor?

2. Why does Carnegie believe that “the man who dies thus rich dies dis-
graced”?

104. William Graham Sumner on Social
Darwinism (ca. 1880)

Source: Albert G. Keller, ed., The Challenge of Facts and Other Essays by

William Graham Sumner (New Haven, Conn., 1914), pp. 17-27. Keller
concludes that the essay from which this excerpt is taken was written during

the 1880s.

During the Gilded Age, large numbers of businessmen and middle-class
Americans adopted the social outlook known as Social Darwinism. Adher-
ents of this viewpoint borrowed language from Charles Darwin's great
work On the Origin of Species (1859), which expounded the theory of evolu-
tion among plant and animal species, to explain the success and failure of
individual human beings and entire social classes. According to Social

Darwinists, evolution was as natural a process in human society asin

36 Voices of Freedom

J — Ep]

nature, and government must not interfere. Especially misguided, in this
view, were efforts to uplift those at the bottom of the social order, such
as laws regulating conditions of work or public assistance to the poor.

The era's most influential Social Darwinist was Yale professor William
Graham Sumner. For Sumner, freedom required frank acceptance of inequal-
ity. The growing influence of Social Darwinism helped to popularize a “neg-
ative” definition of freedom as limited government and an unrestrained free
market. It also helped to persuade courts, in the name of “liberty of contract,”
to overturn state laws regulating the behavior of corporations.

MAN 1s BORN under the necessity of sustaining the existence he has
received by an onerous struggle against nature, both to win what is
essential to his life and to ward off what is prejudicial to it. He is born
under a burden and a necessity. Nature holds what is essential to him,
but she offers nothing gratuitously. He may win for his use what she
holds, if he can. Only the most meager and inadequate supply for
human needs can be obtained directly from nature. There are trees
which may be used for fuel and for dwellings, but labor is required
to fit them for this use. There are ores in the ground, but labor is nec-
essary to get out the metals and make tools or weapons. For any real
satisfaction, labor is necessary to fit the products of nature for
human use. In this struggle every individual is under the pressure
of the necessities for food, clothing, shelter, fuel, and every individ-
ual brings with him more or less energy for the conflict necessary
to supply his needs. The relation, therefore, between each man’s
needs and each man’s energy, or “individualism,” is the first fact of
human life.

It is not without reason, however, that we speak of a “man” as the
individual in question, for women (mothers) and children have spe-
cial disabilities for the struggle with nature, and these disabilities
grow greater and last longer as civilization advances. The perpetua-
tion of the race in health and vigor, and its success as a whole in its
struggle to expand and develop human life on earth, therefore,
require that the head of the family shall, by his energy, be able to

America’s Gilded Age, 1870-1890 37

supply not only his own needs, but those of the organisms which
are dependent upon him. The history of the human race shows a
great variety of experiments in the relation of the sexes and in the
organization of the family. These experiments have been controlled
by economic circumstances, but, as man has gained more and more
control over economic circumstances, monogamy and the family
education of children have been more and more sharply devel-
oped. If there is one thing in regard to which the student of history
and sociology can affirm with confidence that social institutions
have made “progress” or grown “better,” it is in this arrangement
of marriage and the family. All experience proves that monogamy,
pure and strict, is the sex relation which conduces most to the
vigor and intelligence of the race, and that the family education of
children is the institution by which the race as a whole advances
most rapidly, from generation to generation, in the struggle with
nature.

The constant tendency of population to outstrip the means of
subsistence is the force which has distributed population over the
world, and produced all advance in civilization. To this day the two
means of escape for an overpopulated country are emigration and an
advance in the arts. The former wins more land for the same people;
the latter makes the same land support more persons. If, however,
either of these means opens a chance for an increase of population,
itis evident that the advantage so won may be speedily exhausted if
the increase takes place. The social difficulty has only undergone a
temporary amelioration, and when the conditions of pressure and
competition are renewed, misery and poverty reappear. The victims
of them are those who have inherited disease and depraved appetites,
or have been brought up in vice and ignorance, or have themselves
yielded to vice, extravagance, idleness, and imprudence. In the last
analysis, therefore, we come back to vice, in its original and heredi-
tary forms, as the correlative of misery and poverty.

The condition for the complete and regular action of the force of
competition is liberty. Liberty means the security given to each

38 Voices of Freedom

man that, if he employs his energies to sustain the struggle on
behalf of himself and those he cares for, he shall dispose of the prod-
uct exclusively as he chooses. It is impossible to know whence any
definition or criterion of justice can be derived, if it is not deduced
from this view of things; or if it is not the definition of justice that
each shall enjoy the fruit of his own labor and self-denial, and of
injustice that the idle and the industrious, the self-indulgent and
the self-denying, shall share equally in the product.

Private property, also, which we have seen to be a feature of
society organized in accordance with the natural conditions of
the struggle for existence produces inequalities between men.
The struggle for existence is aimed against nature. It is from her
niggardly hand that we have to wrest the satisfactions for our needs,
but our fellow-men are our competitors for the meager supply. Com-
petition, therefore, is a law of nature. Nature is entirely neutral; she
submits to him who most energetically and resolutely assails her.
She grants her rewards to the fittest, therefore, without regard to
other considerations of any kind. If, then, there be liberty, men get
from her just in proportion to their works, and their having and
enjoying are just in proportion to their being and their doing. Such
is the system of nature. If we do not like it, and if we try to amend
it, there is only one way in which we can do it. We can take from
the better and give to the worse. We can deflect the penalties of
those who have done ill and throw them on those who have done
better. We can take the rewards from those who have done better
and give them to those who have done worse. We shall thus lessen
the inequalities. We shall favor the survival of the unfittest, and
we shall accomplish this by destroying liberty. Let it be under-
stood that we cannot go outside of this alternative: liberty, ine-
quality, survival of the fittest; not-liberty, equality, survival of the
unfittest. The former carries society forward and favors all its best
members; the latter carries society downwards and favors all its
worst members.

America’s Gilded Age, 1870-1890 39

‘What we mean by liberty is civil liberty, or liberty under law; and
this means the guarantees of law that a man shall not be interfered
with while using his own powers for his own welfare. It is, therefore,
a civil and political status; and that nation has the freest institutions
in which the guarantees of peace for the laborer and security for the
capitalist are the highest. Liberty, therefore, does not by any means do
away with the struggle for existence. We might as well try to do away
with the need of eating, for that would, in effect, be the same thing.
What civil liberty does is to turn the competition of man with man
from violence and brute force into an industrial competition under
which men vie with one another for the acquisition of material goods
by industry, energy, skill, frugality, prudence, temperance, and other
industrial virtues. Under this changed order of things the inequali-
ties are not done away with. Nature still grants her rewards of having
and enjoying, according to our being and doing, but it is now the man
of the highest training and not the man of the heaviest fist who gains
the highest reward. It is impossible that the man with capital and the
man without capital should be equal. To affirm that they are equal
would be to say that a man who has no tool can get as much food out
of the ground as the man who has a spade or a plough; or that the man
who has no weapon can defend himself as well against hostile beasts
or hostile men as the man who has a weapon. If that were so, none of
us would work any more. We work and deny ourselves to get capital,
just because, other things being equal, the man who has it is superior,
for attaining all the ends of life, to the man who has it not.

Questions

1. How does Sumner differentiate between the “natural” roles of men and

women in society?

2. How does he explain the existence of poverty and social inequality?

